Press record.
Not by my phone, that would be bad.
So today is Wednesday the 31st of May 2023.
My name is Paul Hunt from Man Cap Cymru and could you introduce yourself please?
Yeah, my name is Janet Kensch and I'm a committee member and a volunteer with Man Cap Cymru.
So how did you get started with Man Cap Cymru again?
It was when we moved back here to West Wales.
I was born and bred in West Wales, well actually where I live now is about five minutes from where I was brought up in Sanderville.
I moved to Cardiff to do some work and then oh gosh I was there for, I had my two children and came back here with the whole family.
Back in 2001, because we were always looking for services for my daughter's school or any discipline.
We were looking at different organisations and got involved with Man Cap Ceredigion.
That was 22, 23 years ago.
On the basis of knowing what was available.
I found out that Man Cap Ceredigion didn't really do anything for children.
They were basically concentrated adults, which would have meant me walking away from them really because it didn't benefit Beth.
But I was talked into staying and getting involved with committee work and was on that committee then for a while.
So how old is Beth?
She's now 30 this year. She was born in 92, so she'll be 31 this year.
So you spent some time in Cardiff?
She was born in 92, I lived in Bathy. She was born in Llandoc Hospital.
It took us a few years to get some, well actually we've never had a diagnosis, a proper one.
But obviously we knew she had a learning disability when she was about two.
We'd looked at Swansea at that time, then we had Alcanson, Dylan, her brother.
So we pretty much knew when she was about two or three that she would have some difficulties.
And how easy was it to find services there compared to Ceredigion?
Just as difficult really. I can remember the time where the nurse, the district nurse, whatever you want to call her,
in the doctor's surgery saying, we haven't assessed, but yeah, it sounds like she'll need help.
And I can remember thinking, right, let's see what help is out there.
And sat in, we had a little library place in the house with a phone and desk.
And I thought, right, let's start, darling. And started bringing people up.
And they then would pass me on to somebody else, to another organization, so I did that.
And I suddenly realized that it was going to be very difficult to find support or help or advice,
because during that hour, I followed all the places I was led to and came back to the first person I spoke to.
So there was a lot of agencies out there, but no concrete support in any way.
And this is in Swansea now, all well-meaning and everything, but nothing with practical support.
Then we got social services involved, and that meant loads of assessments.
And I mean loads, and they'd be coming to the house, a social worker, a nurse, a psychologist or something else.
And they'd come to the house and they'd be asking you the same questions.
And you'd think, oh, God, can you read the file before you came?
And I felt like somebody said, well, what you should do is record, like we're recording today,
record everything and just say to them, look, I'll go make the coffee while you listen to the recording.
Because, you know, it was just repeating itself.
But no, it was very little support, really.
But then you don't know often what support you need either.
Now, that's what I found difficult.
But we were there then for a few years and then we decided we...
She started a little school in Townhill, which was really lovely, Townhill School.
A lot of people very snobbish about that.
We tried to get into a Welsh school and they said, I'll never forget this Dr Tanimian Singleth Hospital.
Well, you know, you'd probably best stick to just teaching her English because, you know, when she grows up,
there won't be many people speaking Welsh.
She'll be able to support herself.
You know, it was best to...
And I regret that, really regret it, because, you know, she could have handled two languages easily.
But anyway, she went to Townhill School, lovely school.
And then we decided to come back home.
And it meant going through the whole process again, if you like.
But there was a difference, really.
There was a really good children's department or whatever you want to call it.
I think it was in Pembroke.
And the person who led it was Errol Bray.
She's retired now, but I think she's still involved with a lot of stuff in the area.
And she had this unit there.
And they were really, really good.
They had a good record.
They set up a good respite system, although we never used it ourselves.
They were involved with DASH, which was a parent led organisation that did holiday things.
They took over these schools and you could come along.
And, you know, kids and the siblings as well, you know, would be in little groups and stuff.
They did some respites in Teetlin, in Ketting near Aberaerhe.
Where people could, again, Bethan didn't take part in that.
But, you know, your child could go there for a week and enjoy just being with other people.
For the purposes of the tape, I should probably just say there's a gigantic dog sniffing around.
Which is not mine, by the way.
So as a unit, they were really, really good.
But again, it was limited what they could do as well, really.
But going back to my captain together, it's very limited what they could do because they were only really looking at adults.
But I always used to think, well, I'm glad I did get in contact with them because, you know,
while your child is a child with a learning disability up until 18 to 25, you know,
there's a duty for supporting them, you know, educationally and social services wise.
And getting involved in that kind of thing highlighted how different it was basically as an adult with disabilities,
because that duty goes out through the window, really.
What you're entitled to as an adult with an disability is totally different to the child.
So it was as much a shock to me then.
Well, I sort of planned ahead for Bethan as being an adult, knowing there wouldn't be anything really for her.
Far, far less than the support and services that she had as a child.
Growing up in Kheriteekyon as a child with disabilities was great for Bethan.
She was lucky to be in Chandisil Primary School.
They were very, very good.
She went to an excellent secondary school in Newcastle Emily,
even if they're headed by Helen Ling.
So, you know, her childhood and her upbringing was good compared to a lot of people I know.
I had a tough time with her, really.
I think we might have to pause and get the dog out because I think the breathing is going to be coming on the recording.
Oh, pause it. No, no, no, no. Pause it.
So we're recording again just to get rid of the dog.
So how did you feel when you first found out that Bethan had a learning disability?
Oh, God, I don't know. I've had to confuse her more than anything.
The thing was that Bethan was born and a lot of my friends are having kids at the same time.
So she looked healthy. She looked beautiful, you know, to look at.
But there were milestones that she wasn't compared to my friend's kids.
So she would be walking at the same time as them, not talking at the same time as them.
I can remember thinking, saying, well, you know, your child should have a hundred words, you know, for that.
She was nowhere near that.
But the main thing we noticed was her socialization, you know, where the other kids were starting to after about six months,
noticing other children and getting involved or playing with things. Bethan wasn't like that, really.
And it took a while to convince doctors and nurses that I thought there was something wrong, you know.
They'd say, oh, well, you know, children, they take a while.
You know, she'll catch her, you know, in all this business. And she didn't.
And I think once I was told, yeah, you might be right here, I thought, no, thank God I've got something right.
Let's, you know, and I think there was a sense of or a mixture of relief or, I don't know,
just the sense of that, you know, now we can get on with doing something about it.
But as a parent, you will always have these feelings of great sadness and grief.
And, you know, depending on how severe that disability is, you know,
they will be doing other things that your friends' kids will be doing, like, you know,
going to university or getting married or having children.
And I think those milestones still hit you and you get quite emotional about it.
But I'm lucky that, you know, I'm quite positive about Beth.
She's quite an unique girl in her ways.
And because of that, I'd always be positive that she's beautiful and I can't think of her in any other way.
So, I, you know, I can't say I was upset, might be the wrong word, or hurt or whatever.
But with me, it was a battle just getting on with it and making sure that she was happy, content and safe.
And I think it changed my view of how to be a parent and how what I wanted for my children,
because I think if Beth hadn't been around, I would have been one of these pushy parents,
you know, quite ambitious for them and push them to do this.
Whereas I'm far more relaxed and I'm certainly more relaxed with Dylan about, you know,
what he's wanted to do in his life and that, you know, the mantra is as long as they're happy and safe.
That's it, you know, and that's all I want for them.
But yeah, so that's that was basically how I felt.
A lot of the Mencap groups were set up to provide social opportunities for people with a disability.
Having had a son without a disability to start with, what were the differences in terms of those opportunities?
What? Between Beth and Dylan?
Yes.
Massive, massive.
We suddenly found out with Dylan how easy it was to bring up a child and go through those milestones.
Having with Dylan, you know, he potty trained himself really, basically.
He'd go to sleep at normal times. He'd eat what, you know, there wasn't any issues about feeding or anything.
He'd socialize with other children, go off and play and stuff.
So there's a massive difference between Beth and the other.
But what was lucky about us having Dylan as a second child was that Bethan seemed to speed up on her progression.
She started speaking a lot faster and, you know, her mind stones were a bit faster getting through,
knowing that Dylan basically was forcing her to catch up.
I mean Dylan would, you know, whereas with us, it would take us a little time to coach Bethan to say things and whatever.
Dylan would demand it, you know, come on Bethan, let's go, you know.
And it's been like that through the night really.
And to today now, he's a great support with her, very defensive.
And, you know, we'll look after her forever, I believe.
But what it's also done for Dylan is that he's been a better person for it, I think,
because I know headmaster was telling me about him in primary school.
One thing about Dylan is if there's a child who starts is new, starting,
or there's a child who's sad or being bullied or finding it difficult,
Dylan's always the one to suss it all out or to go towards the child and support them in a way, be friendly and comfort them and so forth.
And that is because he's been Bethan's brother, you know.
And because of that, I think that's why he's gone into the field of supporting Mencap Ceredigion himself, you know.
He supports us with all the social stuff that we do and all the workshops and stuff like that, and they love him.
But, you know, he treats them as equals.
He treats them as friends and, you know, lives them dearly.
But the other thing is, I think, that he's gone into teaching now is again because he's the type that wants to support and help.
And that I truly believe that's because, you know, he's had a system of him, just probably.
So back to Mencap Ceredigion, how did you first become aware of them?
Well, again, by ringing when we came back to West Wales, we had all these organizations, you know, getting a list of stuff and just ringing.
And I got to meet the chair who's an amazing man, Bill Thompson, who'd been a chair.
He's now passed away.
And Mencap in those days were a bit different to what Mencap Ceredigion was different to what it is today.
And those Mencap Ceredigion in those days were far more involved with the provision of services and supported housing.
They owned a few houses in the county and they employed, trained, you know, they were, you know, ran those supported housing issue.
And Bill Thompson was a great one for, I think he was ex service.
I think he was either Navy or, you know, one of these God through the war titles, you know, Sergeant Major, but such a gentle, lovely gentleman, you know.
And he'd kept the ship together and sort of set up all of these things, respite, supported housing, services, social clubs and all of that.
So it was all very, very well set up and everything when I got involved.
He was very well respected by the professionals as well, by the authorities, you know, and well liked by the members.
And I think one of the nicest letters, I have a few letters that have been given to me in my life from, you know, people I've worked with when I've left, they've sent me a nice letter to see it by, you know.
But the one I treasure the most is from him that he sent because I had to leave Mencap Ceredigion for some reason.
Because I was concentrating on some work issues and I said to him, look, you know, I won't be able to do so much.
And one of the letters I treasure the most is the letter he sent me.
And it's there and I often now read a bit when you know you think, oh God, you know, it's getting too much.
You know, you get your bad days and you read that letter and it makes you feel really good, you know.
He was he was an amazing man and he was the lead of a big, you know, quite a set of quite strong committee members made up of parents.
And they ran everything really basically until Mencap, Cymru came along or Mencap National.
I can't remember the name. Sintje.
Clive. No, that's the guy who came down to do the transitional bit of Mencap Ceredigion, giving the houses.
Howard. Howard Sintje. Yes. Clive is the guy that invented the seat, the bikes.
Howard Sintje. And I remember he came to the Feathers Hotel to have a meeting with us and to reassure us that we were doing the right thing, really.
But I didn't get involved with that so much.
And I think the transition was quite small because the authorities helped it a lot.
And there was some housing associations as well.
And we have today supported housing in the county that are managed out by Mencap and by MIRAS.
But they wouldn't be what they are without Bill Thompson and that committee.
They set it up. It was like fine.
You know, really well looked after, well managed.
So it's quite easy to just pick it up and go.
What was the reason that they transferred over to?
I don't know what it was. I think I don't know because I wasn't involved with it at the time.
Whether it was because the parents were getting quite elderly now and it was a lot for them.
And I mean, every organization will find this. It's hard to get people on board committees and being trustees.
There's a lot of responsibility nowadays for that, whether it was that or whether and this is my guess,
whether it was the legislations and so forth and the amount of liability the authorities had,
whether it was better for them to get involved with it really.
And so Mencap then was involved with the whole thing of support and services and education and living accommodation and everything.
To what we are today, which is something totally different and is run totally differently as well.
But he was an amazing man and we were very, very lucky to have him in Ceredigion.
We were very lucky to have the committee as well.
You've mentioned that when you joined Mencap Ceredigion didn't do much with younger people.
Were there any other young people of members or were the parents similar age to you when you first joined?
No, they were a lot older than me, the parents, because obviously their kids were adults.
My child was a child. But the great thing about it was though, better than getting involved with all the activities.
If we had a disco, I'd bring the kids along. So the committee got to know them very, very early on.
But what was really great is that my child, my children were getting to know the adults with their disabilities.
So I was learning what it was going to be like in the future. And so did Beth and Dylan.
And now Beth and Dylan are friends with these adults who are now obviously in their 50s and 60s.
So they know them as friends now. It is literally like a family.
We know them all. We know their parents. We know what they had for breakfast, what their favorite things are.
And I think the one thing that with Mencap Ceredigion is, and they're probably the same with other branches in Wales,
and something that people don't realize or need to realize and need not to forget is that with Mencap Ceredigion,
we are the only constant in their lives from the time they come on board as adults when they're 18, 29, to the time they die.
Because they will have support workers coming and going. Social workers will come and go. Doctors, nurses, teachers, you name it, whatever.
They'll come and go. But with Mencap Ceredigion, we're pretty much there because we don't change in any way.
We're the same committee, we're the same parents, we're the same members. Nothing changes.
So I think that's quite a good thing about our organization.
And for Beth and until then, they've got people that they've known, like the members I know, that we see coming to Gateway and to all the events that we hold.
I've known them for nearly 25 years. So there's a certain element of trust and knowledge, which in effect is really, really important when you're planning on what we do as a service now.
We're able to listen to them and understand them more than anybody really, besides their own family and friends, obviously.
But certainly we know them more than a social worker. And that's not being disrespectful to the social worker, but that's just being practically honest.
They're not going to know what people are like after knowing them for 25 years compared to knowing them from a file for five minutes.
How did you gradually, your role with Mencap Cairdigan gradually change over the years? Because you're the chair now, is that?
No, I wasn't the chair. I was going, you know, the lead of that.
My half-goals are out to chairs, you know, deputy chairs, secretaries, treasurers, I don't know if all we say.
I came on board really with another lady who was involved with Mencap Cairdigan then, and that was Karen Blower.
We were both the same age, the same. We like the same thing, we got quite friendly.
And our job really was to organize all the discos.
But we were new onto that committee and much as I loved all the committee members, oh, they were all fashioned about their attitude to people with learning disabilities.
I mean, we had to bring them up to the 20th century.
You know, a lot of stuff had happened since, you know, 1983 with the new legislation and, you know, the turn of the century with education and, you know, the Education Act.
But they seemed to rule so back in the 1960s.
And although we lived them to bits, Karen and I had to work really hard.
You know, we used to give money out to organizations.
And one of the things that I think was Kenal and Stiff and the Day Center in Lampeter for people with disabilities wanted a computer.
So they sent us a letter to the committee and we then had a discussion.
And most of the committee members were aghast with a computer.
What do you mean a computer? People with disabilities don't use computers.
But what do you do? They're silly, ridiculous.
And we had to really fight hard to convince our committee that actually, yeah, you know.
And of course, today with phones, I've had members come to me and I'll say, because I'm not technical, as you know,
and I'll give them the phone saying, well, how do I do this, actually?
Or, you know, you surf or whoever it is.
And they'll take the phone off me and they'll sort they've sorted it out.
So technically, our members are really up there, especially with social media.
Perhaps there's a bit too much in social media.
But it was difficult. I can remember one instance.
We were organizing it. It was our first goal at organizing Christmas Disco in TGN.
And I was at Lampardine University, Carambeau, either one.
And we were dealing with the menu.
And we decided that we'll have chicken and, you know, and these chicken, they can't have chicken.
We always have sausage and chips.
I said, why? Well, it's easy to cut it up for them.
And I would look at each other and this is from another era, you know.
So but we won that time. We got them chicken and, you know, proper dinner that they could cut themselves, I think.
So we were in it. You know, it was you could see the generation gap there.
Really big time.
And I'm not sure. I think Bill Thompson was with us, you know, he said, oh, yeah, I get you. I get you.
But a lot of the committee members were really stuck in, you know, the the the old fashioned way of looking after all the awareness
and all people in disabilities in those days.
So how they pushed back on some of those things.
Definitely. I can remember talking to them about the development of Cardiganabar Gaitway.
And that has that started back 60 years ago, again, through Mencap.
You know, these Gaitway clubs, they still do. We still do.
But in those days, it was if you walked into a room, it would be the children.
And you're talking children in their 40s, 50s with the mums.
The mums were knitting and the children would do the jigsaws.
That was the social night. And they used to call it the knitting club because the mums would bring their knitting along.
You know, those attitudes have totally changed now.
I mean, our social clubs now, whereas they used to be run and many of them used to do in day centers.
We purposely took them out to the day centers because we wanted them to be in the community.
So our I know that Aberystwyth is a bit difficult because Aberystwyth is run separate to us and they have it in a football club or whatever,
not in a running club because there's a lot of security in the way.
But the ones that we've set up in down south, it's like Cardigan now is a Cardigan Castle Cafe.
Again, with the community, the one in Abervillian, that one is a bit difficult. We're not all for that one.
But the one in Newcastle Emlyn is in a pub.
The one we're going to be setting up soon in Flintisill, that's going to be a pub.
Purposely because we're in the community and what we found is that the community are now getting involved with us.
Last Saturday, we had a meeting in the three campuses in Newcastle Emlyn and they did a buffet for us.
And we brought our music system with us, which is the best thing we've ever bought.
And we had microphones and we were all listening to music in the beer garden, dancing and everything.
And all of a sudden, the locals are coming out and joining in.
And we've got a video of them all dancing with us and a group had come up for the weekend from Swansea and they joined in.
And we had the microphones and we were all singing like karaoke and we were getting raffles because of the fundraising.
I don't know, it's 20, 30, but they say, no, keep it clear.
They did a fortune on it. But what was good was that the community was involved with us and we were involved with the community in front of you.
And I think that's if you're asking for the difference between what it was like and what it is now, that's a very big positive as far as our members consider.
All the different communities being with the groups that you take into cafes.
Absolutely. Well, think of it this way.
People want to be kind.
There are more good people than bad people, as Ros Angus said.
There are more people there who want to help you than want to turn their backs.
So you want to take advantage of that, really.
But on the business side of it, can you imagine when we went to Newcastle Ebbling, the Cardigan one, the Aberyne one was getting too full.
So we went to Cardigan to decant to some of the world and we opened one in Cardigan.
That was getting too full. So we then opened one in Newcastle Ebbling.
And I can remember going through Newcastle Ebbling, which in its day was pup town, really.
We had about 26 pups in it in those days. It's not so much that now.
But going around with pups to see whether we could open some sort of...
And everybody was really, yeah, yeah, yeah, they'd love it.
But then what we went for, we went there on a Wednesday night, I'll never forget, and the pub was empty midweek.
Nothing happens in midweek. And there were fewer locals in there, I think very much.
And it was the three campuses and we looked and it was ideal.
It had a snooker table, great. It was an area to dance.
There was a place to eat, a beautiful beer garden.
And Wednesday was a quiet night.
So we had a word with Pete and Jill.
They said, yeah, great, you know, if you want, we'll do some food and, you know, we'll welcome them.
So we had a problem.
So now tonight, there's going to be a gateway there.
There's going to be about 30, 40 people there.
Every one of them will be eating.
You know, they'll probably spend a good tenner with drinks and everything.
You know, so it's gone from a pub with a couple of locals on a Wednesday night to a pub that's heaving.
And what's good about it is that the locals knowing there'll be a disco, you know, there'll be something on during the night, you know.
It's a pop pool, it's a busy pub, it's an ice pub, you know, we'll go there.
So the locals, you know, we're actually helping commercially as well.
And that goes for all the other gateways that we've got in the community.
So it benefits the town as well, really.
You know, the Premier Shop next door tells me, you know, they make a bomb on a Wednesday night.
And then I say, why is that? Well, of course, we do a Rathford, don't we?
And they're all in there, our lot, buying sweets.
We've been told off about that before now that we shouldn't be raffling off sweets.
But anyway, that's what the members want.
And they make a bomb on these sweets they buy and bring the bars of chocolates or box of chocolates.
They make a mark in an increase in profits.
What would have happened if you'd suggested taking people to the pub when you first joined Bank of Carid again?
I don't know. I think they would have been concerned.
Because with their gateway, you know, bingo.
We do bingo. You know, they love the bingo.
But only one game takes about 10 minutes, not the whole night.
And then they go to a restaurant once a month or something.
Nothing wrong with that. But our members now, people with disabilities, they're expecting more out of us, you know.
They want to work. Some don't want to work, but some do.
Some want to study more. Some want to socialize more.
Some want to travel. Some want to have a romantic relationship.
Some want to get married.
What they want nowadays is a lot more than what it was 30, 40 years ago.
So you as an ACORUS then, as a charity, you've got to, you know, it's member led.
So they are the ones that tell us what to do.
Like tonight, this morning it was on Facebook.
Oh, what are we doing tonight, Jan? I don't know. What do you want to do?
You know, it's not we'll do this or any other.
So then we spend a fortune on pub garden games, you know, like Giant Connect 4s and Giants.
Giants games and the garden. So we're we're at dark side, but outside.
Yeah. And it's their choice. It's their side, you know.
That's the difference. When you joined, would you say?
No, I don't think it was. No.
I mean, I think things have changed, not as a main category, but things have changed because of the different acts.
Like advocacy, self-advocacy, we're teaching our members now to have a voice.
We're teaching people to listen to those voices.
Nothing without us to take gratitude.
It's there to make it a lot easier for us because they can.
We'll organize it for them, but we don't have to think about what to do.
They'll tell us what to do.
I think as long as they listen, people listen to them, then then, you know, we'll be OK.
But there's still a lot of people out there whose attitude is or go then.
Was it something that happened gradually becoming member led or just happened over time?
It was a gradual thing as we were concerned.
We still had people who didn't quite understand, were not very peace-tee about things.
So it took a while. And there's still a battle sometimes.
In fact, I often think with the situation we're in at the moment with a lot of cuts and the service has been cut back and stuff like that,
that we are getting back to that.
So there's a big, big danger of getting back to the old days where, you know,
that it's whatever money you've got, that's what you get.
And we're not listening to other people as much as to looking at money, vice versa.
How easy has it been for your members of the learning disability to get used to leading the organization and making decisions?
That's a hard one, really.
I mean, we we had a self advocacy group in Kennedy, Cuncone, Kennedy Dump People's Fellows and that finished.
And we were left to know with no advocacy service, self advocacy, there wasn't any advocacy service.
But legislation has changed, not for the better, I'm afraid.
So Mencak Kennedy decided that we'd set up our own self advocacy group.
And it was called, the members called it our voice our choice.
And we helped it for a while, facilitated it, helped them with meetings, administrations, stuff like that, until they were set up.
And we consciously then let them go.
Because one thing with self advocacy, it has to be independent of any other organization, any other service, because otherwise it won't work.
And we were really, really big on that.
But it is difficult to get them to run the meeting effectively.
So you still need to support them.
But it has to be that it's supporting them and not doing it for them.
And that's been a really difficult transition, especially if you're somebody like me.
I like to be in control of stuff.
And I, you know, I blame myself a lot where I'd be in the meeting and I'd say, oh, you don't do it that way.
You do this way, you know, and trying to have hands off.
It's more my problem, I think, than their problem.
Because on Saturday they had a meeting and I would stick myself on the chair and I'd like, I'm not saying a word and keep your mouth.
And you know what? They ran it fine.
So I think there's a bit of confidence in letting them get on with it, but be there to be supportive and not be doing it.
So Mencap Ceredigion is separate to Mencap Cumbria.
What's that relationship been like in the last 20 years?
It's been an odd one really, to be honest with you, because first of all, it's difficult for people outside that don't know us to differentiate the two.
And I think they have to, to be honest, because we do two different things, as far as I'm concerned.
Mencap Ceredigion is a branch, very small branch, of volunteers.
Mencap Cumbria is a charity and they, you know, it's through our wails.
And we're not the same in as much. We have the same ideals.
We have the same hopes and so forth for our members.
We support them in the same way, but we do two different things.
So that was difficult for me because I.
I thought of them as two separate things in as much one fighting the other for the same thought, if you know what I mean.
And that was hard for me, especially funding wise.
There were a couple of issues that really I wasn't happy about where, for instance, if somebody did a will and it was somebody died and it was somebody in Ceredigion,
the money that that will was going to was going to Cardiff.
So we we didn't get a look in. So there's a lot of that going on.
But I don't know. And we work really, really closely now.
I think we've got a really good positive relationship.
Wayne is very supportive of the work that we do, as is he's been supportive of all the other branches.
And you yourself, Paul and all the other staff always at the end of the phone.
The the the head office, you know, in Kidaminsters, where the main office is.
Then there's another.
It's a branch. Oh, this.
There's nothing that they won't do for you if you want to get free T-shirts or you want some advice on, you know, volunteering and shares or insurance or stuff like that.
They're there. And I think as a small branch, you need that big brother support, you know what I mean?
But at the same time, Wayne's really good in letting us get on with this as well.
What we do is legal. He's bothered.
But, you know, he's really, really supportive of things like, you know, one thing I do find with being in West Wales,
Big gripe with me is everything is happening in Cardiff.
Well, if if if a charity is an all Wales charity, they should be covering all of Wales.
You know, they get the funding to support all of Wales.
But you often find all of these charities are based in Cardiff and all the money is drifted over to Cardiff.
Whereas with Mencap, they very much I feel and I see anyway that they spread their resources across Wales.
They spread their funding, if possible, across Wales and all their projects and all their people.
I mean, now we've got a development officer, Rod Drews, who lives in Llandronddol that comes westward.
And, you know, I think I think we're quite lucky as a branch to be associated with Mencap as a whole and to recognize,
well, respect and charity.
Plus, we've got our supported housing as well, half of which are covered by Mencap as well.
So, you know, we've got a strong base in Cardiff.
I know a lot of other counties don't even have a branch.
But, you know, I think it's quite a good outfit where the national, regional and branch works really, really well together.
Could you tell me a little bit about the Comic Con?
Comic Con, we as a branch have the fingers in lots of pies.
You know, we have a gateway.
We have a swimming group.
We have a lot of talent, artwork, all sorts of things.
But my daughter was really, really interested in a lot of our members in animation, anime, Disney and other Japanese stuff.
And she used to love dressing up and going to comi, what you call them?
Comic Con conventions where you dress up and so forth.
I wish to take her to London and stuff. I remember taking her to one in
The Hacks article
One of these big places anyway, Excel Center, Excel Center, and I can remember going in there
She was dressed up. I wasn't and I felt really really standing out
You know I was in normal clothes and everybody else was dressed up and it's a massive place
And there's this big room in there and they were all collecting something or other in bits
Thousands and somebody said to me there's 80,000 people in this room
all dressed up
And I know there's only 75,000 living in Keredikio. We could have filled the whole of Keredikio
And there's a massive massive
Different things to do with animation
But what I noticed was an awful lot of people with learning disabilities and autism were really keen
Why I don't know but there's a massive following
Bethan used to go to all these places and I've said there's only two places that I
Have seen Bethan which I would say she fits in. She's like a normal person if there's such a word as normal and that's
Disneyland Paris
Disneyland in Florida and any convention, right and
They fit in
And I remember Bethan we were driving back from London and she said to all these journeys can we not have one in Wales?
Can we not have one in Keredikio? I said what a convention? Yeah, I said, oh, yeah, I suppose we could
And we thought yeah, that'd be great idea
Nothing ever happened and this is one particular like we were in Cardigan
Never forget Cardigan Gateway and there was a support worker there was new and I've seen it before and
Bethan hooked up to this support work and they were there was disco and dancing and they were talking together and they were really into
you know each other type of thing and
spoke to her and her name was Rowan and
She said oh Bethan's fascinating. I love animation said
And she and Bethan had this t-shirt on with some anime remark that any
Serious serious anime person. Yeah, no one else knew her but an anime and she was attracted to that issue. I turned out the Rowan
Not only had she been to Japan where Bethan would love to go to she'd actually gone to University of Japan to study animation
and
She was actually involved with wild films on a part-time basis as well
so she was doing a bit of soft and support work and she was involved in that and
What developed out of that was?
Rowan and Bethan
Hannah who's another sport goes would a brilliant artist an animator and
Jake who is a well-known Jake reticulous of one and filmmaker encounter
Teamed up the four of them and they set up
Kennedy gone animation group and with that group they they meet up on a regular basis and they've made good
Three four five films animated films during kovat. They were having two meetings every week
And not only a members in Kennedy young
But with people from Cardiff pretend
Pembrokeshire and they meet up on zoom and they're brilliant artists as well
And they do an awful lot of work together and they've had some awareness days. They've had some
workshops in
Cardigan small world theater and everything and think we got some money
From my films and from company to actually have a convention. And so we are the first convention and
About three or four hundred people came along to it. We've made two films for it
Actually in the abbey's with our sentence
We have the next one then or the 28th of March
And let's get it
2020 2090 when was kovat?
2020 and
That was the week that kept you decided to do a lockdown. We did it a week before actually, okay, and
I'd beth on the computer
Telling everybody that we had cuts but we had ours
About two months ago. I've got loads of people coming along and we're now
Determined unless we've got another kovat to do it on an annual basis
Most most are yeah, but no there are people there as well who
Are just interested in animation and it's working with universities and other agencies
But we it's it I
Can see being a lot not bigger money this but it's just getting what?
What was the impact of kovat on?
the organization
Crikey
That was a big shock to us because
Everything came to a stop. It wasn't a gradual stop. It was a stop. So all our social clubs couldn't meet
So we within a week decided and we were probably one of the first
to use social social media I
Found out about zoom never had a zoom before
still don't quite understand that it works, but anyway and
With very very quickly we were using FaceTime
We got a lot of volunteers along
And we did things with our members things like Monday night was a quiz night
Wednesday Saturday comedy nights everybody had to come along with a you know a joke
We'd have marks out of ten
We had Friday coffee morning
Then we had things like keep fit
We look at volunteers that keep fit with them
We did some cooking. They didn't do much cooking. I think we couldn't done more. We had Tom Tom Evans
who
Is it is it right he's got a
relative to learn disabilities and he wrote a
whole book feel like and
he read he wrote it and
Read it every single day of the lockdowns every day and
Other people did I mean Rihanna for instance
she used to do the competition of the week where she'd take a photo of a jar with
Jelly beans in it and you have to guess how many so on a Monday
You'd have you'd have the picture and then people be sending in their guessing, you know
and the next week would be a box of pencils how many pencils are the things like that that
They would get involved with that sort of thing and then we got a pop group
Dunham was friends with and with the lead singer did a
a night wake Sanloth songs from
We had George from cut comedy entertainers having discos and we were really poor we were
Faf to say and busy an hour with them when we were before Colbert
But the other thing that we did as well
was
We were on the other on the side the other side of the phone if people were in need of any help
So and we would refer like if people couldn't get to a shop or something that we could ring the authorities and get them
To a food bank or whatever so that it was that link
But what we were conscious of was
That not many people where people weren't on social media, how were they coping?
We were disappointed. I have to say with some of the supported housing organizations not being supportive
And getting their members on social media. They've every house has got a computer
Stuck in their office. That's a problem
But there was nobody I can remember one sport worker telling me I don't agree with social media
I think it's terrible that they can you know can also the problems as though I don't really care what you think I
Want that person on Facebook? He's able to do it. I want you to support it and as it was you have to
but I
Think the worst thing about covert
For certain people who weren't in contact with us through social media or zoom
Was they miss their friends?
You know a lot of people think people with disabilities, you know, they're not really good at communicating or socializing or you know
They don't have eye contact. So how can they make friends and how you know all of this business?
But actually they are the most social people in the world and they really really missed gateway
there was one person
Who used to bring me every week I?
Know what he said to me on the other side of the phone was
When is the Christmas disco?
When is the gateway when when am I gonna see my friends and stuff and they were breaking their hearts?
Because they could they just didn't have a social life and I always think but I see these
policies coming from the wretched assembly, you know
Supporting people to go to work
Whether they like it or not, they could have exposed it gonna work or
Supporting people to live independently
To cook to pay the bills
I know
The different things but there's very very little I was hoping they'd learn from the pulpit situation
fairly little about social life and
They are a wild they have a right to
To how to socialize but there's very little provision up there for a social like
Supporting people to go out
Not just go to the pub. I've seen support workers taking people for a coffee
Go for a coffee seems to be a big thing or go to the pub for a drink, but nothing about socializing
Helping them to get to know where the people for instance, that's what we aim to do with our gateways
I mean, you know a social worker who sits next to a person in one of our gateways and
They don't get involved with their client or other people. They're there on their phones
We take a photo of them
I mean shows of it till this is not the way to support people
So we encourage our social workers and support workers and they do to not only get involved with the clients
But also get involved with the whole group so the client can get to know people be friendly
You know socialize. Yeah, and
they can a lot more out of
Their social events by doing that really they missed it over
And then men connecting we're getting really upset
But I tell you the first gateway part of the plant I
Mean there were tears, you know, it was just hugs. Although we were supposed to hug we were
But that was the first time we had just really emotional which just goes to show is that people with disabilities can
You know have certain relationships that are really important for them. When lockdown ended and things got back to
normal
Did things for men cap care again get back to normal straight away or?
We really wanted to get back straight away into normality
There were legislations that stopped us to do it as fast as you could do as opposed
You know, we had to have our meetings outside instead of inside and all this business. We had to have masks
We had to do this we have that which you know made life a little bit difficult, but I would say within a month
We were back to normal
But with the members back to normal
Yeah, to a certain degree I think I think it took them a bit of time
You know with the wearing the masks of the worry of COVID and oh we can't touch or you know
Things like that and especially support workers could work for agencies who are very strict about
You know wearing the mask
For a lot more than they needed to or couldn't sit next to people the third regular meeting
Sit next to people the third regulations are quite strict really
Whereas we're more laid-back. I suppose we're more maverick or more
in your face
Which is which makes it more disappointing that a lot of agencies now
Certainly the authorities are still not back to normal
The day centers are still not open and we're doing three years now. The offices are still not manned
You know now if I want to get in contact with
Somebody in in social services. I've got to go through the reception area
They take my telephone number or my email address and then that personal come back to me
And I know that person is working from home
Which often means the baby's crying in the background or the dog is barking
You know my computers down my computers next door. I can't oh and I think oh dear dear dear dear
You know things have not gone back to normal and it'll take a while I think
People have been given choices of working from home
Which I think is good because you know environmentally is good
But they need to be making sure that the service doesn't change
And the people that are working from though are actually working in a place that can be adapted into a working area
And I don't think that's been done
And I think we're missing out on services certainly because of of that and the way
Services are running at the moment. So they're far far
Slower to get back to normal but as far as we're concerned as if COVID never happened really
so finally
Been at Mancap Coyote again 20
23 years
Are there any new Jans joining?
Oh, I hope so
It's hard to get volunteers really hard especially nowadays because um,
You know people are working one two jobs
Um, you know things are harder nowadays really
um
We've got a couple of people coming along
I think it's more mindful than anything in trying to let things go and the worst one to delegate
um
I give somebody a job to do
Oh, you know
Gil they they're not doing it properly. Give it to me. I'll do it. I'll finish it all. I'll do it
um
But we have started we have to do one again where we had a friend's tea
Where is a mixture of interested friends and parents?
um, and I think we need to work and persevere on that because otherwise
You know, no, there won't be another Jan
And you've got to have another journal, you know to have a pool of
volunteers and able to take over
Well for the future finish there. Thank you very much
North North